---
layout: archive
title: "My Dissertation"
permalink: /dissertation/
author_profile: true
---

# The implications of socioindexical order for adolescent stylistic development and sound change

In my dissertation, I explore the relationship between socioindexical order and stylistic practice for sound changes in progress in Michigan English. By socioindexical order, I mean the degree to which a variant (in this case, a pronunciation) is socially meaningful. For example, one can say that Southern US English vowel pronunciations are extremely socially meaningful -- people have very strong and well-defined ideas about what it says about you, your personality, and even your intelligence if you have a strong Southern accent. Of course, these are harmful, essentialistic assumptions based on stereotypes, but people hold onto them for dear life nonetheless. Contrast Southern US English vowel pronunciations with something like Colorado English vowel pronunciations. You likely don't have a very well-defined sense of what Colorado English vowels sound like and what differentiates them from the vowels of other American English varieties. The ideas that people hold about what it *means* to sound Coloradan -- what it says about your personality, abilities, or social positioning -- are probably also more nebulous. We can say that Colorado English vowels are *much* less socially meaningful than US Southern English vowels, both on a national level, and likely locally in Colorado, too. And by stylistic practice, I mean the ways that people use language (certain pronunciations) to signal social information about themselves -- whether it be group membership or some personality characteristic, like laid-back, cool, or popular. I am interested in looking at the relationship between these two things specifically as it pertains to sound change (where a community changes its pronunciation over time as a group) because stylistic practice is often argued to be key to spreading new pronunciations around a community and cementing them in the community's speech. And above all, adolescents are thought to be the single most important group in driving this process of pushing a community toward sound change. This makes sense when you think about how older generations always complain about the youths' newfangled words and ways of speaking. Members of older generations are responding conservatively to adolescents' role as the movers and shakers of linguistic change.

At the heart of my dissertation research is the following question: Are sound changes that are very socially meaningful more likely to be used in adolescent stylistic practice (and therefore more likely to travel along that particular route of community spread) than sound changes that are much less socially meaningful? If the answer to that question is "yes," then sociolinguistic theory must account for this -- if less meaningful sound changes are not being used stylistically by adolescents, then how are they spreading throughout the community?

## What sound changes am I looking at?

I'm examining two sound changes that are currently ongoing in Michigan English: the replacement of the Northern Cities Shift vowel system with the Low-Back-Merger-Shift vowel system, and the increasing use of the creaky voice register.
